Nine elements of flow

Csikszentmihalyi identified nine elements of flow that he saw repeatedly in his
research:

1. There are clear goals every step of the way. In many everyday situations,
   there are contradictory demands and it’s sometimes quite unclear what should
occupy our attention. But in a flow experience, you have a clear purpose and a
good grasp of what to do next.

2. There is immediate feedback to one’s actions. When you’re in flow, you know
   how well you’re doing.

3. There is a balance between challenges and skills. If a challenge is too
   demanding compared to your skill level, you get frustrated. If it’s too
easy, you get bored. In a flow experience, there is a pretty good match between
your abilities and the demands of the situation. You feel engaged by the
challenge, but not overwhelmed.

4. Action and awareness are merged. People are often thinking about something
   that happened – or might happen – in another time or place. But in flow,
you’re concentrated on what you’re doing.

5. Distractions are excluded from consciousness. Because you’re absorbed in the
   activity, you’re only aware of what’s relevant to the task at hand, and you
don’t think about unrelated things. By being focused on the activity, unease
that can cause anxiety and depression is set aside.

6. There is no worry of failure. In a state of flow, you’re too involved to be
   concerned about failing. You just don’t think about failure. You know what
has to be done and you just do it.

7. Self-consciousness disappears. People often spend a lot of mental energy
   monitoring how they appear to others. In a flow state, you’re too involved
in the activity to care about protecting your ego. You might even feel
connected to something larger than yourself. Paradoxically, the experience of
letting go of the self can strengthen it.

8. The sense of time becomes distorted. Time flies when you’re really engaged.
   On the other hand, time may seem to slow down at the moment of executing
some action for which you’ve trained and developed a high degree of skill.

9. The activity becomes “autotelic” (an end in itself, done for it’s own sake).
   Some activities are done for their own sake, for the enjoyment an experience
provides, like most art, music, or sports. Other activities, which are done for
some future purpose or goal – like things you have to do as part of your job –
may only be a means to an end. But some of these goal-oriented activities can
also become ends in themselves, and enjoyed for their own sake.
Csikszentmihalyi concludes by saying that “in many ways, the secret to a happy
life is to learn to get flow from as many of the things we have to do as
possible.”
